JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
I reiterated to Chancellor
Merkel my strong
support of NATO, as well as the
need for our
NATO allies to pay their fair
share for the
cost of defense.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In his first
meeting with the
leader of Germany, President
Trump signals
a hard line and confronts
questions about
his charge that President Obama
wiretapped
him.
Then: On a tour of Asian
capitals, Secretary
of State Rex Tillerson talks
tough on dealing
with North Korea's nuclear
program.
And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
analyze this
full week of news.
Plus, Jeffrey Brown sits down
with author
Neil Gaiman to discuss the
stories of Norse
mythology in his new book.
NEIL GAIMAN, Author, "Norse
Mythology": From
my perspective, it was the joy
of just going.
This is part of the heritage of
the human
race.
Let me give it to a new
generation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The veteran
leader of Germany
and the new American chief
executive, Chancellor
Angela Merkel and President
Trump met today
at the White House in what many
thought would
be a moment to smooth relations
after a rocky
start.
Whether that was the outcome is
far from clear.
Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret
Warner has our report.
MARGARET WARNER: Chancellor
Merkel got a warm
presidential welcome at the West
Wing this
morning, yet minutes later, an
odd scene in
the Oval Office, Merkel offering
to shake
hands, but getting no response.
ANGELA MERKEL, German Chancellor
(through
translator): Do you want to have
a handshake?
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
Thank you very much.
MARGARET WARNER: At a joint news
conference
later, the two did exchange
compliments in
prepared statements.
DONALD TRUMP: Our alliance is a
symbol of
strength and cooperation to the
world.
It is the foundation of a very,
very hopeful
future.
ANGELA MERKEL (through
translator): We had
a very good first exchange of
views, so I'm
very much looking forward to the
talks we
will have over lunch.
MARGARET WARNER: But the body
language of
their first meeting wasn't warm,
perhaps reflecting
the two leaders' sharply
different styles
and viewpoints, Mr. Trump, the
businessman-turned-politician
who campaigned on America first,
and Merkel,
political veteran, now Europe's
most vocal
defender.
It's been a touchy long-distance
relationship
up to today.
Last year, candidate Trump
accused Merkel
of ruining Germany by accepting
hundreds of
thousands of Syrian refugees.
DONALD TRUMP: I don't know what
went wrong
with her.
I don't know what went wrong.
Angela, what happened?
What happened, Angela?
MARGARET WARNER: Today, the
chancellor was
asked whether she had any
reservations about
the president's combative style.
ANGELA MERKEL (through
translator): People
have different abilities,
different characteristics,
traits of character, have
different origins,
have found their way into
politics along different
pathways.
Well, that's diversity, which is
good.
Sometimes, it's difficult to
find compromises,
but that's what we have been
elected for.
MARGARET WARNER: Two of those
areas of difficulty,
NATO, and the European Union.
Mr. Trump has repeatedly
criticized NATO states
for not paying their share of
the common defense.
He said today he had pressed
Merkel to boost
defense spending to 2 percent of
economic
output, the alliance's stated
goal.
DONALD TRUMP: Many nations owe
vast sums of
money from past years.
And it is very unfair to the
United States.
These nations must pay what they
owe.
MARGARET WARNER: Merkel repeated
Germany's
pledge to get to 2 percent of
GDP within the
next seven years.
ANGELA MERKEL (through
translator): NATO is
of prime importance to us.
It wasn't without very good
reason that we
said during our summit meeting
in Wales that
also Germany needs to increase
expenditure.
We committed to this 2 percent
goal until
2024.
MARGARET WARNER: The president
has also criticized
Germany for running a huge
manufacturing trade
surplus with the U.S.
Today, he said:
DONALD TRUMP: The United States
has been treated
very, very unfairly by many
countries over
the years.
and that's going to stop.
But I'm not an isolationist.
I'm a free trader.
But I'm also a fair trader.
Germany has done very well with
its trade
deals with the United States.
And I give them credit for it.
MARGARET WARNER: Merkel noted
that any trade
agreement has to between the
U.S. and the
E.U.
ANGELA MERKEL (through
translator): It will
be of benefit to both countries.
Let me be very honest and very
candid.
A free trade agreement with the
United States
of America has not been all that
popular with
Germany either.
MARGARET WARNER: Merkel's
dealings with President
Trump may affect her own
popularity at a critical
moment.
She's seeking a fourth term as
chancellor
in elections later this year,
and faces challenges
both from the left and the
right.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: President
Trump defended the White House's
handling
of his claim that President
Obama had him
wiretapped.
His press secretary, Sean
Spicer, had quoted
a FOX News analyst who suggested
British intelligence
handled the wiretapping.
The British flatly denied it and
complained
to the White House.
But at his news conference
today, the president
dismissed the furor.
DONALD TRUMP: All we did was
quote a certain
very talented legal mind who was
the one responsible
for saying that on television.
I didn't make an opinion on it.
That was a statement made by a
very talented
lawyer on FOX.
And so you shouldn't be talking
to me.
You should be talking to FOX.
JUDY WOODRUFF: FOX News issued a
statement
today saying that it has --
quote -- "no evidence
of any kind that Mr. Trump was
surveilled
at any time in any way."
But with German Chancellor
Merkel looking
on, the president then connected
his own claim
to allegations back in 2013 that
the Obama
administration monitored her
phone calls.
DONALD TRUMP: As far as
wiretapping, I guess,
by this past administration, at
least we have
something in common, perhaps.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, the
Justice Department
said today that it has complied
with congressional
requests for any information on
surveillance
during the campaign.
It gave no details.
There's new trouble tonight for
the Secret
Service.
The agency has confirmed today
that someone
stole a laptop from an agent's
car in New
York yesterday.
It was parked near her Brooklyn
home.
The Secret Service says the
laptop has multiple
security layers and doesn't
contain classified
information.
Agency officials also confirmed
this evening
that a man who jumped a White
House fence
a week ago was on the grounds or
16 minutes
before being arrested.
He didn't enter the building,
but he got close.
President Trump today ramped up
his push for
the Obamacare replacement bill.
He met with conservative
Republicans, and
said he's -- quote -- "100
percent" behind
the measure.
Later, he predicted it will pass
pretty quickly.
Other lawmakers said changes to
the bill are
in the works, and House Speaker
Paul Ryan
said the process is going well.
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker of the
House: There
are people from middle and from
the right
who have various concerns.
And we're trying to make sure
that we address
as many of these concerns as
possible without
destroying the bill and without
losing votes,
but adding votes.
And we're getting -- we're
really doing well.
We feel very good.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the Senate,
four Republicans
have already come out against
the bill, leaving
it short there of a majority.
In Yemen, 42 Somali refugees
were killed last
night when they came under
attack at sea.
Survivors said they were trying
to flee Yemen
to Sudan, when a naval vessel
and a helicopter
gunship opened fire.
Shiite rebels in Yemen blamed a
Saudi-led
coalition.
The coalition had no immediate
comment.
The Pentagon denied today that a
U.S. airstrike
targeted a mosque in Syria's
Aleppo province.
Activists and a powerful rebel
group said
the attack killed nearly 50
people, mostly
civilians who had gathered for
prayers.
But a U.S. military photograph
showed the
mosque still standing, while a
building across
the street was destroyed.
A Pentagon spokesman said the
strike killed
dozens of al-Qaida fighters, not
civilians.
The International Energy Agency
reports that
worldwide carbon emissions
remained flat in
2016.
Emissions fell in the United
States and China,
the two largest emitters, thanks
to greater
use of renewable, nuclear and
gas power.
Still, the agency says it's not
enough to
prevent the continued rise of
global temperatures.
And Wall Street finished the
week on a so-so
note.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost nearly
20 points to close at 20914.
The Nasdaq rose a quarter-point,
and the S&P
500 gave up three.
For the week, all three indexes
gained a fraction
of a percent.
And Nobel-winning poet Derek
Walcott died
today at his home on the island
of Saint Lucia.
His work focused on the
Caribbean and earned
him renown as one of the
greatest writers
of the second half of the 20th
century.
He won the Nobel Prize for
literature in 1992.
Derek Walcott was 87 years old.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the secretary
of state talks tough about North
Korea during
his first trip to Asia; a major
physicians
group speaks out against the
Republican health
care plan; Mark Shields and
David Brooks analyze
the week's news; an author's
inspiration from
Norse mythology; and much more.
Secretary of State Rex Tillerson
at one of
the most tense places on the
planet, the border
between North and South Korea,
it's the second
of his stops on an important,
three-country,
whirlwind tour of Asia, where
allies and adversaries
are both close at hand.
Hari Sreenivasan has that.
REX TILLERSON, U.S. Secretary of
State: Let
me be very clear: The policy of
strategic
patience has ended.
HARI SREENIVASAN: From South
Korea, Secretary
of State Rex Tillerson signaled
a tougher
line on dealing with North
Korea, including
the possibility of a preemptive
military strike.
REX TILLERSON: Certainly, we do
not want to
-- for things to get to a
military conflict.
If they elevate the threat of
their weapons
program to a level that we
believe that requires
action, that option is on the
table.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tillerson
spoke in Seoul
after visiting the demilitarized
zone that
separates the two countries, and
the truce
village of Panmunjom.
North Korean soldiers looked on,
snapping
pictures.
The secretary arrived at a time
of mounting
tensions.
North Korea has test-fired
ballistic missiles
twice in the last three weeks,
as U.S. and
South Korean troops conduct
elaborate, annual
joint exercises.
The North also carried out two
nuclear tests
last year.
Yesterday in Japan, the
secretary said 20
years of attempts to curb
Pyongyang's nuclear
ambitions have failed.
REX TILLERSON: In the face of
this ever-escalating
threat, it is clear that a
different approach
is required.
The purpose of -- part of the
purpose of my
visit to the region is to
exchange views on
a new approach.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This morning,
President
Trump weighed in via Twitter.
He wrote: "North Korea is
behaving very badly.
They have been playing the
United States for
years.
China has done little to help."
The Chinese have condemned North
Korea's nuclear
and missile tests.
But they also oppose deployment
of the U.S.
ballistic missile defense
system, known as
THAAD, to South Korea.
Tillerson answered today in
Seoul, before
heading to Beijing tomorrow.
REX TILLERSON: While we
acknowledge China's
opposition, its economic
retaliation against
South Korea is inappropriate and
troubling.
We ask China to refrain from
such action.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The South
Korean foreign
minister underscored the U.S.
argument that
the missile defense system is
not aimed at
China.
But the recent ouster of South
Korea's president,
in a corruption scandal, could
change the
landscape.
The liberal candidate favored to
win the presidency
in May says he will review the
THAAD deployment,
and consult with China.
For more on the secretary's trip
to Asia,
and the significance of what
Tillerson had
to say in South Korea, we turn
to veteran
diplomat Kathleen Stephens.
She was U.S. ambassador to South
Korea during
the Obama administration.
She's now at Stanford
University.
How significant were the
secretary's remarks?
KATHLEEN STEPHENS, Former U.S.
Ambassador
to South Korea: Well, I think
they were very
significant, and closely
listened to and heard
throughout the region, as well
as here.
In fact, I think it's first
somewhat extensive
press conferences as secretary
of state.
It was indeed a very tough
message, but I
also think he picked his words
pretty carefully.
And a lot of what he had to say
was a reinforcement
of what had been the Obama
administration
policy, but I think an
indication that he
wants to toughen it up even
more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is this our
chief diplomat
saying diplomacy hasn't been
working, the
talking hasn't been working?
KATHLEEN STEPHENS: Well, in
fact, there hasn't
been much talking with North
Korea over the
eight years.
And one thing that did strike me
about Secretary
Tillerson's remarks was that he
was quite
specific and categorical in
saying now is
not the time for talks.
I actually would have liked to
have seen him
keep the door a little bit ajar
on that, because
I think, when you do have a new
administration
in Washington, there will soon
be a new administration
in Seoul, there's a good
argument for trying
to climb that mountain one more
time and seeing
what's possible diplomatically,
because at
the very least, it helps you
build coalitions
you need to increase the
pressure if the diplomatic
approach doesn't work.
HARI SREENIVASAN: He's
advocating tougher
sanctions.
Will tougher sanctions work
against North
Korea?
KATHLEEN STEPHENS: Well,
sanctions are a very
blunt instrument.
And sanctions have been --
against North Korea
have been progressively
tightened and broadened
through Security Council
resolutions, through
bilateral action by the United
States, by
actions by South Korea and
Japan.
China has also participated,
although, of
course, there's never been
satisfaction, I
think, with China doing or a
sense that China
is doing as much as it possibly
could.
But will sanctions work?
I think they can bring pressure
on the regime,
and they are bringing pressure.
Will they lead Kim Jong-un to
make a strategic
choice that he's ready to trade
his nuclear
and missile program for a
lessening of sanctions
and for other benefits?
I think that the chances of that
working are
far less promising perhaps than
they ever
have been.
But it doesn't mean you give up
on sanctions.
But I think it means it has to
be only one
part of your approach.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Given what we
know and we
don't know about North Korea's
leader, is
this the type of thing that
prods him to come
to the table, or does it just
anger him more?
And, at times, his actions have
not been predictable.
KATHLEEN STEPHENS: Well, I think
what we know
about Kim Jong-un, who has now
been in power
for five years, is that a
priority, his priority
has been to accelerate and
consolidate his
nuclear weapon and ballistic
missile capability.
And to date, the sanctions, the
isolation,
the -- and, for that matter, the
carrots that
have been offered to him to do
otherwise have
not been sufficient.
So, I am pessimistic about them.
But I think that continued
pressure is important,
because you don't know what the
timeline is
for getting somebody to the
table.
And I think Secretary Tillerson
is right.
Indeed, it was something that
the Obama administration
emphasized, that China also
plays a very important
role.
But I think sanctions have to be
combined
with some kind of exit ramp.
And the ramp has to be into
something that
allows him to start to make some
adjustments.
And given where he is in the
program, we may
have to lower our sights about
what he needs
to do to get into talks.
And this was one part of Mr.
Tillerson's presentation
that concerned me a bit.
He stated, perhaps for tactical
reasons, a
kind of a maximalist approach,
which has long
been an approach which has --
that basically
North Korea needs to give up
everything before
we get into a diplomatic
process.
I do think it is going to have
to be a process,
probably a slow process, but
certainly the
principle which was held by
Obama administration,
which Mr. Tillerson reinforced,
that there
needs to be a readiness on the
part of North
Korea to say they are prepared
to move toward
denuclearization, is an
important prerequisite.
And that is one that the Chinese
have also
agreed to and need to reinforce.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Something that
has been
of interest in South Korea is
not who Mr.
Tillerson met with, but who he
didn't meet
with.
He didn't seem to meet with any
of the opposition
leaders.
And he kind of talked to an
administration
that is a lame-duck.
How significant are things -- or
how much
is it likely to change after
South Korea has
a new election?
KATHLEEN STEPHENS: Right.
It's always a tricky question in
the middle
of an election campaign is how
you can manage
those meetings.
So, I have some sympathy with
the diplomatic
nuances of trying to do that.
But, certainly, I mean, less
than two months'
time, South Korea will have a
new president.
The election is on May 9.
And that new president will take
power, I
guess, immediately.
And it looks now that it's going
to be most
likely a president from the part
of the political
spectrum that has tended to lean
towards trying
a little harder on the
engagement angle with
North Korea.
In any event, I think any new
South Korean
will want to look at the options
for that.
And I think it will be very
important not
to close off too many options
before that
new government gets in place,
and then to
see with Seoul, as well as with
Beijing, what,
along with deepened pressure,
deepened sanctions,
more countries participating and
pressuring
North Korea, what might be
possible in terms
of a fresh diplomatic approach,
some kind
of grand bargain that addresses
our core interest
in seeing all of the Korean
Peninsula denuclearize
-- and that means no nuclear
weapons in North
Korea -- but finds a way to get
into some
kind of talks on that basis.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Kathleen Stephens,
thanks so much.
KATHLEEN STEPHENS: My pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
and the Republican
leadership in the House are
working to pass
a health care bill later next
week.
But there's still criticism and
concern about
the impact of this bill,
including among lawmakers,
governors and, of course, among
voters.
There are also a number of
powerful interest
groups who are directly involved
in health
care and they are expressing
reservations.
Tonight, Jeffrey Brown hears one
of those
perspectives.
JEFFREY BROWN: In 2010, the
American Medical
Association, the largest
physicians group
in the country, lobbied for the
passage of
the Affordable Care Act.
Fast-forward to today, the group
is publicly
opposing the proposed House
Republican health
plan.
Dr. Andrew Gurman is its
president, and joins
me now.
Welcome to you.
DR.
ANDREW GURMAN, President,
American Medical
Association: Thank you.
Delighted to be here.
JEFFREY BROWN: Can you boil down
the essence
of the opposition?
What is wrong with this plan?
DR.
ANDREW GURMAN: Sure.
We know that people who don't
have health
insurance live sicker and die
younger.
So, it is a basic principle of
ours that people
who have insurance shouldn't
lose it, and
people don't have health
insurance should
get it.
And we're afraid that, under
this bill, that
wouldn't happen.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, take parts of
it.
The tax credit part, emphasis of
this, why
wouldn't that work, or who would
that not
work for?
DR.
ANDREW GURMAN: Well, we're
concerned that
the poorest and sickest among us
would be
the ones most affected.
And I will give you an example.
These are numbers from the
Kaiser Family Foundation.
Someone who is 60 years old
under the Affordable
Care Act might get subsidies of
up to between
$9,000 and $13,000 to buy
insurance, depending
on where he or she lived.
Under the proposed legislation,
that subsidy
would be $4,000 flat, across the
board.
It doesn't know where you live.
It is virtually impossible to
purchase insurance
at that age for $4,000.
JEFFREY BROWN: Do you see an
impact on your
own patients?
You're already hearing the
worries?
DR.
ANDREW GURMAN: The worries that
my patients
have, have to do with high
deductibles and
availability of insurance.
And I can give you example of
someone I saw
last week in my office,
self-employed carpenter,
probably makes somewhere between
$20,000 and
$30,000 in a good year.
He needs to have surgery on his
hand.
He has a $6,000 deductible.
That's a big problem for him.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, to push back
a little bit
on you here, many doctors have
also, of course,
complained about the ACA, right,
about the
-- too many regulations, gets in
the way of
the doctor-patient relationship,
takes away
choices from patients.
You are also getting some
pushback from the
White House about that you and
other interest
groups are opposed because it
hits you financially,
you doctors financially.
What do you respond?
DR.
ANDREW GURMAN: Well, there is no
question
that there are things in the
Affordable Care
Act that need to be fixed.
There are various ways that that
could be
done.
Repeal and replace is one of
them, but we
don't know what the replacement
is.
So, the AMA has clearly stated
that we think
that the American people should
see what the
proposed replacement is, so that
we can have
a thoughtful discussion
regarding whether
it's better or worse than what
we have now.
There are many things in the
Affordable Care
Act that could be fixed, rather
than replaced.
JEFFREY BROWN: The repeated
claim behind all
this, of course, is that
Obamacare is collapsing.
Do you see that?
DR.
ANDREW GURMAN: Well, there's no
question that
the markets which were created
under the Affordable
Care Act need to be stabilized.
There are lots of ways to do
that.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, finally, the
president
says we're going to get through
all this,
we're going to get a new health
plan.
Do you think that will happen?
What will it take to get the AMA
on board?
DR.
ANDREW GURMAN: Well, the AMA
stands ready,
willing and eager to work with
Congress in
order to get this right and to
make it work
for all Americans.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, again, do
you think it
will happen?
DR.
ANDREW GURMAN: I hope so.
JEFFREY BROWN: You do hope so,
even though
you oppose what is on the table
right now?
DR.
ANDREW GURMAN: Oh, I hope that,
at the end
of this process, that we have a
health care
system that works for everybody
in America.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right.
DR.
ANDREW GURMAN: It's already the
envy of the
world.
We just need to make it work for
us.
JEFFREY BROWN: Dr. Andrew
Gurman, president
of the AMA, thank you.
DR.
ANDREW GURMAN: My pleasure.
Thank you for having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And to the
analysis of Shields
and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and
New York Times columnist David
Brooks.
Welcome, gentleman.
So, let's pick up with the
conversation, David,
that Jeffrey Brown was just
having with the
head of the American Medical
Association.
President Trump is saying again
today the
health care overhaul is moving
along very
well, it's going to move through
the House.
What do you see as the
prospects?
DAVID BROOKS: It has no critics.
No.
I'm first all amazed that they
did it first.
Of all the issues to tackle,
health scare
is probably the hardest one.
And so every four or eight
years, some president
decides, you know, let's do
health care first.
And it hurts them every single
time.
Whether the prospects of this
bill are good,
I tend to doubt.
It has very few fans in the
Senate.
And it has two wings of
opposition which are
in contradiction, what we call
the coverage
caucus, who want a little more
expensive bill
that will cover more people, and
the Freedom
Caucus wants a less expensive
bill to cover
less.
You can't -- they have to win
both of these
groups.
And how do you do this, when
they are mutually
contradictory?
And so the Senate is very
daunting.
So, therefore, you're asking the
House members
to vote for something that will
take away
coverage that already exists for
a bill that
probably doesn't have great
prospects in the
long run.
I personally bet they get
through the House,
just because it's so hard to go
against the
sitting president in his first
major thing.
But I wouldn't want to bet on
the eventual
passage of this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Mark, what
we hear is
the main argument they are using
now in the
House as it gets closer to the
vote is the
political vote, you can't go
against your
president.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
It's an argument that used, used
in 1993 for
the Democrats and Bill Clinton
on his major
budget and tax increase, which,
by the way,
per what David was talking
about, included
a BTU tax that House members
voted on.
It passed the House in a very
difficult vote
and died in the Senate.
Several moderate to conservative
Democrats
walked away from it.
And it left those House members
with a vote
that they really couldn't -- it
became politically
mortal -- fatal in several
instances.
I think the same thing is true
here, and for
good reasons, Judy.
I mean, the Republicans -- part
of David's
answer -- they pledged in 2010,
they pledged
in 2012, they pledged in 2016.
That was the one pledge they
had: repeal Obamacare.
It was an applause line.
So, it really did take on almost
a moral imperative,
or at least a political
imperative.
But, Judy, this is going to
radically overhaul
the Affordable Care Act.
It going to radically overhaul
Medicaid.
You heard Dr. Gurman in his
interview with
Jeff.
The reality is, providers are
not going to
provide coverage.
They're not going to take on as
patients people
under Medicaid, because they are
not going
to have the money to pay for it.
They are talking -- one figure
that jumps
out, beyond all the questions of
deductibles
and everything else, 24 million
Americans.
That's what the Congressional
Budget Office
estimates.
And Republicans just kind of
recoiled.
That is the number that has hung
around -- are
going to lose coverage.
Lose coverage.
That just is -- that is truly
unforgivable.
It's morally indefensible.
And I think, in this case, it
will be politically
indefensible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But we're talking
-- you're
talking, Mark, about the bill as
it sits in
the House.
In the Senate, we may -- we're
almost certain
to see changes.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, but which
direction?
First, on the 24 million, it's a
neat trick
to do that, because simply
repealing Obamacare
would have only taken coverage
from 23 million.
So, somehow, the replacement
subtracts a million,
which is an interesting trick.
The Republican Party just hasn't
figured out
where it sits on this issue.
I think you could have a very
good free market
system, sort of modeled on
Switzerland, where
there are a lot of individual
markets, people
actually pay for their health
care, and there's
some cost and demand -- supply
and demand
pressures to get costs down.
But you would have to spend more
to get it
-- make it universal.
You business have to make it
universal using
a free market system.
But the Republican Party hasn't
gotten there,
because they don't want to make
it universal,
because it probably would be
extensive.
And so some of them want to go
sort of in
that direction, but a lot, Ted
Cruz, Rand
Paul, they want to go in the
other direction.
And they just don't think it's
the government's
job to be in the field of
distribution, redistribution.
And this ACA was very
redistributionist.
The Republican Party hasn't
figured it out.
And what is interesting to me is
that Donald
Trump hasn't figured it out.
He campaigned partially as a
populist.
And if I was a populist, I would
be handing
things to my people.
And what this bill does is, it
takes things
from the Trump voters.
The middle-aged people, 50 to
64, get hammered
in this bill, the people just
above the Medicaid
threshold.
The working class, they get
hammered.
And so what is the one piece of
the bill that
has been there from the
beginning to end in
all the versions, is the tax cut
for people
making over $250,000.
And so it's a weirdly
anti-Trumpian bill that
he has sort of gone along with
because, I
guess, the House Republicans led
the way.
MARK SHIELDS: I think -- I can't
argue with
any point that David made.
I would just say, it's
inconceivable to me.
Donald Trump changed the face of
the Republican
Party, whatever anyone thinks of
this election.
He carried 403 counties that had
voted for
Barack Obama.
The counties he carried, Judy,
were considerably
more white than the country is,
and they were
considerably less educated.
They were struggling working
class.
And he has turned his back, not
simply on
the health care, this bill does,
but on the
budget.
It takes from the have-nots.
It takes from the have-nots and
the have-lesses,
and gives to the have-mores.
It is absolutely a
Robin-Hood-in-reverse budget.
And I just don't understand it.
It really, to use David's word,
hammers the
very people who voted for him,
especially
in rural areas in America.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David, what about
the budget
proposal?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, just some
things are mystifying.
Why they eliminated the
Appalachian regional
development, the thing that --
why they severely
cut the Great Lakes regions,
Michigan, Wisconsin,
why they had to put those
specific cuts in
the budget, let alone -- fine,
Republicans
are going to try to get rid of
CPB, our beloved
CPB, Corporation for Public
Broadcasting.
But why they put those things,
it's mystifying.
And it seems to go in direct
contradiction
to everything he stood for in
the course of
the campaign.
And there's a theory going
around in political
science which has some resonance
for me today,
which is that you have moments
where you get
a political party knows what
they believe
and they are all on board.
Then there's periods of
disruption, where
they are internally divided.
And the argument is, Jimmy
Carter was an example
was this.
The Democrats had shifted away
from some old-style
liberalism.
They hadn't got to Bill
Clinton's style.
And they were internally
divided, and that
Donald Trump is like Jimmy
Carter.
He comes at a time when the
Republican Party
does not know what it wants, and
that he himself
is internally divided.
And you get these weird
contradictions of
campaigning one way, and then
governing in
a very opposite way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And both of you
are saying
the same thing, then, Mark,
about the budget.
MARK SHIELDS: I hope not.
Well, I hope not.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: There's no point
in watching.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At least on this
point.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: No, but, Judy,
just to add to
that, David Rogers, a peerless
congressional
reporter, wrote in Politico,
these -- they
are turning their backs on
Republican-endorsed
programs.
It was President Jerry Ford who
pitched community
development grants.
It was Bob Dole who pushed and
was the champion
of food aid overseas.
They're going to cut that.
It was Ronald Reagan who found
the money for
heating assistance for poor
people.
It's just -- it's amazing.
And it's the same budget that
Paul Ryan passed
in 2013.
But then he was negotiating with
a Democratic
president, because he wanted to
get cuts in
entitlement growth towards his
dream of taming
the budget deficits.
But now he's got Republican
president, and
they're passing the same budget
with the same
cuts.
And I just -- I don't know where
the pickup
is.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
I'm -- was looking for the
political philosophy
that might be inherent in a
budget.
And some of them are just weird,
even for
Republicans, as Mark said, $6
million -- $6
billion off the National
Institutes of Health.
That is an investment in
scientific advance
and economic growth.
And why would you do that?
That doesn't even seem
particularly Republican.
But, basically, what you're
doing, they are
investing in everything that is
hard power.
They're investing in the
military, in homeland
security, everything that is
about threat
and fear.
And they are disinvesting in
everything that
has to do with compassion, with
care, thinking,
innovation.
And it's almost like emotionally
consistent.
It's just hardness and toughness
and fear.
And everything else just has to
go.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, even some
Republicans
are saying, well, this is just
the first shot
from the White House, and we
will have our
own crack at it.
In the few minutes that we have
left, Mark,
let's talk about the president
continuing
to double down on his contention
that he was
wiretapped by former President
Obama.
He's said it.
He said it again today.
His spokesman, Sean Spicer, has
come up with
evidence, they say, or at least
cited news
stories.
And, of course, the British
government pressed
back on, pushed back on one of
that -- one
of the claims that Sean Spicer
made yesterday.
What does this say that this is
something
the president won't let go of,
in the face
of almost universal lack of
evidence?
MARK SHIELDS: It is universal.
When you let -- when lose Devin
Nunes, who
is the chairman of the House
Intelligence
Committee...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Republican.
MARK SHIELDS: Republican, who
has been Donald
Trump's apologist, I mean,
explained that
Donald Trump was actually a
political neophyte,
and you could take things
literally, this
is a man who ran as, you might
disagree with
him, Judy, but you know what he
says.
He stands -- he says what he
believes and
he believes what he says, and he
tells it
like it is.
And now we're down to literally
and figuratively.
Literally and figuratively, I
don't care about
quotation marks.
He said this about the president
of the United
States.
He accused the president of the
United States.
He said it was a fact that the
president of
the United States had done this.
It was wrong.
It was unfounded.
It was unfair.
It was unjust.
It was as unjust as it was when
he charged
that is principal opponent Ted
Cruz's father
had been involved in the
assassination of
President Kennedy, when he
charged that the
first African-American president
wasn't an
American, was African, Barack
Obama.
But now he's president.
Now he's president.
This isn't a matter of his macho
or his vanity
or his toughness.
This is a question, when a
president of the
United States says anything, it
reassures
allies, it confounds the world,
or it reassures
the world, or it alarms people.
And I said last week, I do not
believe, when
the crisis comes, that there's
going to be
credibility for this man.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you
explain it?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, there's some
fear.
One of the things that struck me
this week
is, Donald Trump is the most
talked-about
American in the history of our
country.
Wherever you go around the
world, people are
talking about Donald Trump.
And every -- people who go
abroad, that's
all -- anywhere you go in the
world, people
want to talk about that.
And he does it in part through
this, through
saying things that make him
criticized and
-- but he is the center.
And the second thing he
demonstrates through
this -- and, again, I'm just
trying to illustrate
why -- A, why he got elected
president, and
why these things don't seem to
kill him.
So, he's first center of
attention.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Figuratively
speaking.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, right.
Right, exactly.
And the second is that force.
He shows force.
I was listening to a lot of talk
radio today.
And there is a lot of support
for Donald Trump
is that that guy is tough enough
to stand
against everybody and be
forceful.
And he never withdraws, he never
backs down.
It's just force, force, force.
If you remember when Jeff
Sessions recused
himself from that investigation
on the Russia
thing, Trump reportedly blew his
top, because
it was a withdrawal.
And it was a perfectly
legitimate step back,
but it was a partial withdrawal.
And Trump is always forward,
forward, forward.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And no sign of
any change on
that one.
All right, David Brooks, Mark
Shields, thank
you both.
All right, David Brooks, Mark
Shields, thank
you both.
Have a great weekend.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: a new work
from acclaimed
author Neil Gaiman explores
deities, dwarves
and giants.
Jeff is back with this
otherworldly addition
to the "NewsHour" Bookshelf.
JEFFREY BROWN: The mighty Thor,
god of thunder,
as portrayed by Jack Kirby in
his 1960s comic
book series, one-eyed Odin,
highest and oldest
of the Gods from Roger Lancelyn
Green's "Myths
of the Norsemen."
NEIL GAIMAN, Author, "Norse
Mythology": I
would have been 6 years old when
I first encountered
the -- just the idea of these
Norse gods.
I remember looking at them and
going, this
is amazing.
JEFFREY BROWN: These stories of
the Norse
gods were read and absorbed by
the young Neil
Gaiman.
Now 56, Gaiman has sold more
than 15 million
books, as one of today's leading
writers of
fantasy and science fiction, the
clash of
the very human and the
otherworldly.
The British-born Gaiman first
gained fame
for his comic book series "The
Sandman."
He would go on to write much
more in many
genres, including novels such as
"Neverwhere,"
"American Gods," and "The Ocean
at the End
of the Lane."
And he's now done his own
retelling of the
old tales, titled "Norse
Mythology."
We spoke recently at Scandinavia
House in
New York.
NEIL GAIMAN: I had encountered
the stories
of the Greeks, even of the
Egyptians.
And you look at the supreme
gods, the top
gods.
You look at Zeus, you look at
Ra, and they
are powerful and all-wise and to
be aspired
to.
And yet here is Odin.
And if he turns up at your
house, he will
probably turn up in disguise
and, you know,
leave with half your cutlery,
and possibly
having seduced your daughter.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
NEIL GAIMAN: These are
unreliable people.
When I started writing these
stories -- and
I started working on this book
about four
years ago -- from my
perspective, it was the
joy of just going, this is part
of the heritage
of the human race.
Let me give it to a new
generation.
JEFFREY BROWN: Tell me what
you're doing.
You're not -- you're rewriting
the myths?
NEIL GAIMAN: I suppose I think
about them
as if I'm taking old folk songs
and then perhaps
orchestrating them, arranging
them for modern
ears.
I'm going back to the Icelandic
versions of
these stories that remain to us
written in
a post-Christian world, picking
the versions
of the stories that I like, not
changing things,
not creating, in the sense of
retelling, retelling
as if you were telling a joke
that you love,
but telling it for modern ears.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, you had some
fun with this?
NEIL GAIMAN: I had a lot of fun
with it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
NEIL GAIMAN: But what I didn't
do was invent
stories.
JEFFREY BROWN: You write about
these gods
as though they are still with us
to some degree.
And, of course, in your writing,
that's a
motif.
NEIL GAIMAN: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Do you feel that,
that the
gods are with us in...
NEIL GAIMAN: I feel like the
gods are ours.
And we are allowed -- we created
them.
Human beings get to create gods,
and human
beings get to tell stories with
gods.
We carry our cultures around
with us.
We carry our background around
We carry our histories and our
families' histories
and our ancestors histories
around with us.
JEFFREY BROWN: Gaiman himself
has long been
a kind of cult hero to his fans,
who follow
him and his work in progress on
his blog and
on Twitter.
He's reached broader audiences
with adaptations,
a film version of his novel
"Coraline," an
upcoming television series based
on "American
Gods," and much more to come.
NEIL GAIMAN: For me, it's all
part of the
giant, same thing, which is
storytelling.
What fascinates me, what drives
me is the
urge to tell stories.
What then drives you is going,
where is this
story best told?
How can you tell this story as
one thing?
How can -- sometimes, how can
you move this
story from one medium into
another?
JEFFREY BROWN: You wrote about
when you achieve
some success, the fear that you
will be uncovered
as a kind, what your wife called
the fraud
police, right?
And you refer to it as the
impostor syndrome,
where this is all too good to be
true.
NEIL GAIMAN: Absolutely, fearing
that it will
be taken away from you at any
moment when
people notice that you are
simply making it
up.
And I guess it's worse for a
writer because
you are simply making it up.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes, you really
are.
NEIL GAIMAN: You know, you look
around, and
you go, well, doctors, they have
at least
learned things.
And, you know, architects must
know how to
architect.
But I'm just a guy who makes
stuff up, and
people happen to like it.
And, maybe tomorrow, they won't
like it.
Maybe there will be that knock
on the door,
and there will be that guy in a
suit with
a clipboard saying, right, we're
onto you.
You have to go and get a real
job now.
JEFFREY BROWN: In the meantime,
look out.
The "Norse Mythology" ends with
Ragnarok,
the apocalyptic end of the
world.
NEIL GAIMAN: One of the things
that I love
about Ragnarok is, yes, it's the
end of all
times, it's terrible, all the
people are killed.
Everything is destroyed.
And yet, even as Ragnarok
finishes, you're
told, but there are two human
beings whose
names are Life and Life's
Yearning who are
still hiding successfully, and
they will repopulate
the world.
And, yes, the sun is destroyed,
but a new
sun will come up fresher and
brighter than
the old one.
JEFFREY BROWN: Until then, from
New York,
I'm Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will be
back shortly
to hear a writer's thoughts on
how stories
influence our beliefs.
But, first, take a moment to
hear from your
local PBS station.
It's a chance to offer your
support, which
helps keep programs like ours on
the air.
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
"Atlantic"
magazine writer Derek Thompson,
author of
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
"Atlantic"
magazine writer Derek Thompson,
author of
the recent book "Hit Makers,"
looks at how
stories help us understand and
even change
the way we see the world.
It's the latest installment in
In My Humble
Opinion.
Have a listen.
DEREK THOMPSON, Author, "Hit
Makers: How Things
Become Popular": One thing I
learned writing
a book about pop culture hits in
entertainment
is that stories are weapons, for
good or ill.
Movies like "Frozen" can teach
us female empowerment.
Movies like 1915's "The Birth of
a Nation"
can teach us prejudice.
For example, take one of the
most ancient
and universal myths, vampires.
For hundreds of years, people
didn't understand
death or disease.
Why did people get sick in
bunches?
Why did people often die after
their friends
did?
So, all over the world,
different civilizations
made up the same story: Death
comes from the
undead.
Before the 1800s, the belief in
vampires stretched
from Transylvania to China.
Albanian vampires ate
intestines, while their
Indonesian brethren drank blood.
In Eastern Europe, they
discriminated against
people they thought might become
vampires,
including the disabled,
atheists, and even
seventh children.
Today, we know germs exists and
vampires do
not.
It's tempting to say it was just
a stupid
story, but the truth is that
vampires were
the perfect story.
It didn't just explain the
mystery of death.
Even more, it explained the
chaos of life
with a spectacular tale that
empowered villagers
by telling them that everybody
had the capacity
to fight evil with potions,
garlic, prayers,
chastity, stakes, swords, and
fire.
We have come a long way since
vampires.
Or have we?
Even today, society is bound by
the stories
that we tell each other.
In an office, loud women are
bossy, but loud
men are assertive.
An outspoken white person is
authoritative,
but an outspoken black person is
threatening.
Are men smarter than women, or
whites smarter
than other races?
There is no scientific basis for
these ideas.
They are stories that had to be
invented,
constructed, told, and believed.
From the time we are children,
we hear stories
about the way the world ought to
work.
From the time we are children,
we hear stories
about the way the world ought to
work.
Who should we trust?
Who should we fear?
These are social narratives
passed down, like
bedtime stories, across
generations, telling
us how to live and what to
expect.
Science finally killed the folk
belief in
vampires, but how do we drive a
stake through
misogyny or prejudice?
History is full of men and women
who successfully
championed justice and equal
rights.
Empathy and equality are
powerful stories.
They need equally powerful
storytellers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And on the
"NewsHour" online
right now: It's a startling
image that has
spread quickly across the
Internet, a Syrian
man sitting in his bombed-out
bedroom in Aleppo
listening to music from a record
player.
We talked to the photographer
who captured
the moment of reverie.
You can find that on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Later tonight on "Washington
Week": The White
House sparks an international
incident by
suggesting British intelligence
helped the
Obama administration wiretap
Trump Tower.
Why is the president doubling
down on these
unsubstantiated allegations,
unsubstantiated
so far?
That
is tonight on "Washington Week."
On "PBS NewsHour Weekend"
tomorrow: an interview
with the director of "Newtown,"
a documentary
On "PBS NewsHour Weekend"
tomorrow: an interview
with the director of "Newtown,"
a documentary
about resilience after the mass
shooting at
a Connecticut elementary school.
And next week, join us online
and across our
social media platforms for live
coverage of
the Senate hearings for
Supreme Court nominee Neil
Gorsuch.
That is starting Monday at 11:00
a.m.
Eastern.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and good night.